## Tutorial 6.4: Recommendations for Classroom Use

**About**

All tutorials, as well as contents of the *Mapping for a Sustainable World* cartography book, are available for classroom or workshop use following a CC BY-NC license (see [**Tutorial 0.1**](/0_Introduction/0.01_Overview.md) for attribution information).

If you would like to use the previous tutorials or select elements of *Mapping for a Sustainable World* in the classroom, there are a few things to consider:

1. What subject are you teaching?
2. How much classroom time can you dedicate to cartographic lessons?
3. How much preparation time can you dedicate to cartographic lessons?
4. What are the technological capabilities of your students?

There are four options for classroom lessons laid out here. However, you are certainly not limited to these options.

Each lesson can be adapted based on the subject (geography vs. history; a certain period in history). Generally, the more you relate the cartographic lesson to a specific subject matter, the more preparation time there will be.

**Option 1: World Projections**

Subjects: Anthropology, Geography, History, Political Science

Classroom Time: Short (1 period)

Preparation Time: Short

Technological Capabilities: At least one computer with QGIS installed

Readings: **Section 2.4**: Map Projections, **Section 2.5**: Centering, and **Section 2.6**: Cartographic Scale

Tutorials: [**Tutorial 1.5**: Creating a Project and Setting the Projection](/1_Choropleth/1.05_Project_and_Save.md), [**Tutorial 2.2**: Projecting Map and Adding Data](/2_Proportional_Symbol/2.02_project_and_data.md), and [**Tutorial 6.2**: Recommendations for Reprojecting in QGIS](/6_Future_Directions/6.02_Recommendations_Reprojecting.md)

Review the readings and tutorials listed above. Common ***projections*** to discuss with your students include ***equal area***, ***conformal***, ***azimuthal equidistant***, and ***compromise***.

> ***Projection***: the process of transferring geospatial data from a three-dimensional model of the Earth to a two-dimensional or "flat" map (see **Section 2.4**)

> ***Equal-area***: a projection that preserves the relative areas of polygon features, often heavily distorting shape as a result

> ***Azimuthal projection***: a projection that preserves directions from a single point to all other points on the map

> ***Equidistant projection***: a projection that preserves distance from either one point (planar) or two points (cylindrical and conic) to all other points on the map

> ***Compromise projection***: a projection that balances distortion across all map properties

You and your students may be surprised by the number of different ways that maps distort the world. For this lesson, first consider any maps hanging in your classroom. Determine what projection they use (there may be metadata for each map indicating the projection). Discuss the types of projections using the maps in your classroom as an example.

Second, open QGIS to discuss projections. If only the instructor has a computer, the screen can be projected to the class. If students have their own computers, they can explore different projections on their own device.

Add the world basemap file to QGIS as in [**Tutorial 6.2**: Recommendations for Reprojecting in QGIS](/6_Future_Directions/6.02_Recommendations_Reprojecting.md). First, have students change the projection to a few common projections such as Albers Equal Area Conic, Mercator, Polar Azimuthal Equidistant Projection (i.e., the United Nations logo!), Eckert IV, etc.

In addition to projecting the world in different ways, you also can research common projections for your own country, or a country that you are studying in class. Project this country in a few different ways.

If you select a certain country to consider, you will notice that the rest of the world is extremely distorted. When the focus is a specific country, compromises can be made in other parts of the world.

Finally, allow students to explore different projections in QGIS on their own. If only the instructor has a computer, ask the students to suggest options and reproject accordingly. Conclude the lesson with discussion about the implications that there is no "accurate" or "correct" map and therefore no "one perfect map"! 

**Option 2: Bias and Design**

Subject: History, Journalism, Political Science

Classroom Time: Short (1-2 Periods)

Preparation Time: Short to moderate

Technological Capabilities: At least one computer with QGIS installed

Readings: **Section 1.9**: Data Classification, **Section 2.10**: Colour, and **Section 2.14**: Visual Art and Visual Style

Tutorials: [**Tutorial 1.7**: Classifying Attribute Data](/1_Choropleth/1.07_Classify_Data.md)

Review the readings and tutorials listed above. The focus of this option is to show students how easy it is to manipulate data for different goals.

Begin by finding maps relevant to a theme or topic you are teaching. Look for maps used as propaganda (such as during a war or change of power) or ones that may be misleading in other ways.

Share these maps with students, and give them information on the source. Ask them to analyze the map for biases the same way they might analyze a written historical document, news article, or political cartoon for biases.

Emphasize that often maps are seen as objective, when in reality they can be full of biases, just like anything else created by humans,

A discussion of misleading maps is an opportunity for a complete lesson in itself. However, you can add onto this lesson by asking students to create maps themselves.

If you want to use specific data relevant to your subject, review [**Tutorial 6.1:** Recommendations on Gathering Data](/6_Future_Directions/6.01_Recommendations_Gathering_Data.md) describing how to find and clean data. Make sure that the dataset is joined properly before providing it to students. Recent data is often easier to map as country borders are constantly changing.

Due to the complicated nature of geospatial data, you may not ask students to collect their own data, which can be time consuming and full of technical errors that you may not have the skills or time to resolve. Choosing and joining a dataset ahead of time streamlines learning objectives and brackets required technical skills.

Once you have a dataset for the students to use, ask them to manipulate the classification of the data, similar to [**Tutorial 1.7**: Classifying Attribute Data](/1_Choropleth/1.07_Classify_Data.md). Second, ask the students to change the colour of the classification scheme, referencing **Section 2.10**: Colour.

Further, place the students into two opposing groups, based on the subject you are teaching. Ask them to create a map using classification, colour, text, etc., that displays the opposing country or group in a negative way. Then, compare the maps between groups. In the end, your students will realize how easy it is to create a biased map.

**Option 3: Choropleth Map Design**

Subject: Cartography, Computer Science, GIS, Journalism

Classroom Time: Medium (1-3 Weeks)

Preparation Time: Short

Technological Capabilities: Multiple students must have computers with QGIS installed

Readings: **Section 1.3**: Location Data, **Section 1.4**: Attribute Data, **Section 1.7**: Data Transformation & Normalization, **Section 1.9**: Data Classification, **Section 2.4**: Map Projections, **Section 2.10**: Colour, **Section 2.13**: Layout & Visual Hierarchy, **Section 2.14**: Visual Art & Visual Style, **Section 3.1**: Thematic Maps, **Section 3.3**: Choropleth Maps, and other sections as needed.

Tutorials: [**Tutorials 1.1-1.12**](/1_Choropleth)

Review the readings and tutorials listed above. In short, you can provide students with [**Tutorials 1.1-1.12**](/1_Choropleth), allowing them to learn how to create a choropleth map. You should do the tutorial yourself at least once before implementing it in the classroom to answer any questions that come up.

This option is more extensive than the previous options. It could be an entire lesson or module in a Information Visualization, Computer Science, GIS, or Data Journalism class. 

**Option 4: Complete Cartography Curriculum**

 

Subject: Cartography, GIS

Classroom Time: Long (Complete Course)

Preparation Time: Moderate

Technological Capabilities: Multiple students must have computers with QGIS installed

Readings: Sections 1-3, and Section 4 as needed

Tutorials: [**Tutorials 1.1-1.12**](/1_Choropleth), [**2.1-2.7**](/2_Proportional_Symbol), and [**3.1-3.3**](/3_Nominal)

With the correct resources, you can offer a full course on cartography. Both the *Mapping for a Sustainable World* book and the associated tutorials are a good reference point for the creation of a course.

You are certainly not limited to just these four options. Both the United Nations and the UW Madison Cartography Lab would be thrilled to hear how else you are using *Mapping for a Sustainable World* in your classroom.

