## Tutorial 0.1: Introduction

**About**

These tutorials pair with the open-source textbook *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)*. The textbook teaches principles of cartography through the United Nations' 17 ***Sustainable Development Goals***. *Mapping for a Sustainable World* was developed as a collaboration between the United Nations and the International Cartographic Association with the University of Wisconsin Cartography Lab supporting creation of the book layout and all maps and graphics through [National Science Foundation CAREER Grant #1555267](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1555267).

> ***Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)***: the overarching blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all and to address global challenges, adopted in 2015 by the Member States of the United Nations (SDGs, see **Section 1.1** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book).

All tutorials demonstrate map design using the ***open-access*** mapping software [QGIS](https://qgis.org/en/site/). Thus, the objective of these tutorials is to enhance the cartographic design thinking described in *Mapping for a Sustainable World* with technical map software training, putting concepts into practice.

> ***Open access***: products that are freely available for anyone to use or modify (see **Section 4.13** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book)

The tutorials were developed by Lily Houtman, Gareth Baldrica-Franklin, and Robert E. Roth of the [University Wisconsin Cartography Lab](https://geography.wisc.edu/cartography/) under NSF #1555267 and are freely available for personal or educational/workshop use following a CC BY-NC license.

###### Cite/Attribute as: Houtman L, G. Baldrica-Franklin, and R.E. Roth. 2025. *Mapping for a Sustainable World: QGIS technical supplement.* The University of Wisconsin Cartography Lab. Online: [www.geography.wisc.edu/cartography/education/sdgbook/](www.geography.wisc.edu/cartography/education/sdgbook/). DOI: [10.5281/zenodo.5585647](https://zenodo.org/record/5585647)

**How to Use These Tutorials**

There are four sets of tutorials that follow the technical design and implementation of a choropleth, proportional symbol, nominal map, and dot density map from *Mapping for a Sustainable World*. The tutorials are meant to be followed sequentially and use a number (i.e. 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, etc.) to indicate the sequence.

 
The tutorials are intended to enhance but not replicate information from *Mapping for a Sustainable World*. Keywords from the book ***use bold and italics*** and are followed with the definition from the glossary offset with a reference to the relevant book section (Note: *Mapping for a Sustainable World* uses British English).

**Tutorial Organization**

1. The first set of tutorials [**Tutorials 1.1-1.13**](/1_Choropleth) demonstrate how to design the ***choropleth map*** on page 34, which displays SDG Target 5.5.1: "Ensure women's full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making". 

> ***Choropleth map***: a thematic map that shades enumeration units by their attribute values, primarily relying on colour value (see **Section 3.3** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book)

2. The second set of tutorials [**Tutorials 2.1-2.7**](/2_Proportional_Symbol) demonstrate how to make the ***proportional symbol map*** on page 65, which displays SDG Target 3.2.1: "By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births".

> ***Proportional symbol map***: a thematic map that uses the visual variable size to scale point symbols by their attribute values (see **Section 3.4** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book)

3. The third set of tutorials [**Tutorials 3.1-3.3**](/3_Nominal) demonstrate how to make the ***nominal map*** on page 60, which displays SDG Target 15.6.1: Countries that are parties to the Nagoya Protocol.

> ***Nominal map***: a thematic map that depicts categorical data and thus relies on unordered visual variables (see **Section 3.2** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book)

4. The fourth set of tutorials [**Tutorials 4.1-4.2**](/4_DotDesity) demonstrate how to make a ***dot density map*** on page 58, which displays SDG Target 12.2.2: Domestic petroleum consumption per country in Africa.

> ***Dot density map***: a thematic map that that uses the composite visual variable numerousness (arrangement combined with size) to adjust the density of dots placed within enumeration units by their attribute values (see **Section 3.1** from the *[Mapping for a Sustainable World](http://bit.ly/SDGbook)* book)

Completion of the choropleth tutorials is not required to complete the proportional symbol, nominal, or dot density tutorials. However, the choropleth tutorials are a specific, step-by-step set of instructions. The proportional symbol and nominal tutorials are less specific and ask you to refer to the previous tutorial for a "how to", rather than describing each step in absolute detail.

Two additional sets of tutorials build competencies beyond the *Mapping for a Sustainable World* book content that enable new cartographers to make maps of their own conceptualization.

5. The fifth set of tutorials [**Tutorials 5.1-5.2**](/5_Export) demonstrate how to create and export a layout in QGIS and then rebuild this layout in Adobe Illustrator.

6. The sixth and final set of tutorials [**Tutorial 6.1-6.2**](/6_Future_Directions) provide recommendations on how to collect and join your own data and include additional recommendations for instructors who want to teach cartography across differing classroom settings. 

