## Tutorial 4.1: Recommendations on Gathering Data

**Geospatial Data**

Gathering geospatial data is an early and often challenging step in the cartographic design process. Common geospatial datasets include raster files that represent variation over space as a grid of pixels and vector files that represent objects in place as points, lines, and polygons (see **Section 1.3**).

Raster and vector layers, such as those available from [Natural Earth](https://www.naturalearthdata.com/), can be combined to make reference maps indexing a range of geographic features in place. Thematic maps, like many of the maps of SDG indicators in *Mapping for a Sustainable World*, rely primarily on vector layers and join attribute data using a common key or attribute column.

**Data Joins**

These tutorials provide data pre-downloaded and cleaned from the United Nations Global SDG Indicators Database and join these data to the Natural Earth open source shapefile. A ***join*** is a way to associate two different datasets temporarily and is common in cartography for the purposes of spatial analysis and mapping. Joins allow you to associate attribute data in a table format, like a CSV file (comma separated values), with a geospatial file, like a SHP (shapefile file, a common format developed by Esri manipulatable in most mapping software). [**Tutorial 1.3**](/1_Choropleth/1.3_Download_Data.md) demonstrates how to download these datasets and [**Tutorial 1.6**](/1_Choropleth/1.6_Add_Data.md) demonstrates how to make joins.

Data joins are made by computers, not by humans. While a human would know that *The United States of America* and *U.S.A* mean the same thing, a computer does not. As a result, a column called *Country Name* is often not the best way to join two layers.

In these tutorials, you join data based on two standardized country codes: ISO3 code and UN Country Code. Unlike country names, which could be written in many ways by different people, all datasets use the same letters or numbers for these codes. Further, because each of these codes is between 1-3 characters, there is significantly less room for error. If you can find data that includes a column with these or other standardized codes, it will be much easier to make joins.

Depending on the size of your data, there are different options for joining data. You do not want to cross-reference each of the 200+ country names across two files, for example. However, if you are mapping data on the 16 states within Germany, it is not too difficult to compare the names of the states between two files. In this case, you could use the *Name* column to join two layers, manually editing any discrepancies to enable the join.

The amount of time that you want to spend cleaning data also depends on the purposes of your project. If you are an instructor cleaning data ahead of time for student use, you want to make sure that there are no issues with the join to streamline other learning objectives. If you are creating a map for your client or employer, you want to budget time and resources to cross-check your project in mapping software and in spreadsheet format until there are no issues.

Often, it can be easier to clean data in spreadsheet software like Google Sheets or Microsoft Excel, rather than QGIS or other mapping software. For example, if one data source has County tacked onto the end of each name, while the other does not, you could use the *Find and Replace* feature in Excel to replace the word County with empty space.

If you use data from the United Nations, it is very clean, and joins can be made easily. Many governments also keep clean data. However, in some situations, depending on the source of your data, you may have to work harder to clean the data. Even advanced cartographers often spend a long time cleaning data, so do not feel pressured to rush!

